Title: 2017-08-31
Date: 2017-08-31 16:40
Tags: journal, rust

Rust is finally starting to click, I think. I've now written two small
CLI tools in it; this may not be much, but they're both useful tools
and it represents making progress in getting comfortable in the
language.

The [first](https://git.kyleisom.net/util/cbacklight) was a tool to
set the console brightness on the Chromebook. xbacklight wasn't
working, so this reads and writes from sysfs directly. It was useful
to write to learn how to do file I/O and pathname building.

The [second](https://git.kyleisom.net/util/netcheck) was a tool to
check whether the network is currently down on the Jetson. It would
have been easy enough to do in a shell script: some calls to dig, some
calls to netcat, voilà. I made myself do it in Rust to
learn. Fortunately, there's a Rust build for `aarch64`, so I'm all
set. It did require nightly, because there's an unstable function in
use.

One thing that's taking some getting used to is that I can't build
`&str`s in a function the way I'd normally do it in Go. Normally,
I'd try something like the following, neverminding that most of the
Go functions take `string`s:

```go
func joinHostPort(host string, port uint16) []byte {
	return []byte(fmt.Sprintf("%s:%d", host, port))
}
```

Although, I guess what tends to happen is

```go
func joinHostPort(host string, port uint16) string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("%s:%d", host, port)
}

func setupConnection(host string, port uint16) error {
	// ...
	addr := joinHostPort(host, port)
	if err := connect([]byte(addr)); err != nil {
		return err
	}
}
```

In Rust, I've got something like

```rust
fn join_host_port(host: &str, port: u16) -> String {
	return format!("{}:{}", host, port)
}

fn can_connect(host: &str, port: u16) -> bool {
	let addr = join_host_port(host, port);
	match std::net::TcpStream::connect(addr) {
        Ok(_)  => return true,
		Err(_) => return false,
	}
}
```

The `connect` function is painful because I can't set a timeout on it;
the timeout is hardcoded to 60 seconds. I'd rather a 3-5s timeout.

Getting used to having to specify `parameter: type` in functions is
weird, and I keep trying to do `parameter type` instead. Array types
are also weird: `[type; size]`, and I keep forgetting
semicolons. Things to get used to, I suppose.
