Title: 20170829
Date: 2017-08-29
Tags: journal

So, I got into the AI course. I was rejected the first time, and
applied again but didn't really think I'd get in. This might throw off
the Rust learning (or maybe I'll just start to implement some of the
code).

As I was reviewing the first of my [project
ideas](/posts/2017/08/28/project-ideas/) from last night, I started
thinking about some of the challenges in doing them. I started writing
a TCP proxy (still need to write the spec) in Go, but there were a few
things that I ran into. My test setup helped me to flush out these
issues and to test solutions.

To test this, I proxied traffic over the loopback interface from port
8080 to the dev server for this site, listening on port 8000. The
proxy test script, written in Python, would send the string "GET /
HTTP/1.1\r\n\r\n" to the proxied address (127.0.0.1:8080), at which
point the proxy should relay traffic to the dev server and return a
page to the client. To test a few assumptions, I delay one second between
each character. This script is invoked as

```
./proxy-tester GET / HTTP/1.1\\r\\n\\r\\n

```

The problem I ran into was that the receive in the proxy tester would
timeout. Changing the script to parse `\r` and `\n` into a string into
0x0D and 0x0A, respectively, fixed this issue.

However, I first thought the problem was elsewhere, and built an
over-complicated relay function that set read and write deadlines and
copied data in chunks. It was interesting to read up on this, but I
didn't need to worry about it in end, and I reverted back to a simple
`io.Copy`.

I've started writing these programs in Go because it's still the language
I'm most proficient in and it's faster than writing them in C; still, I
hope to write C and Rust versions for these programs as well.
