Title: 2018-05-08
Date: 2018-05-08 09:56
Tags: journal

I didn't get any devlogs written on Sunday or Monday (killer migraine)
but I did go through the Django tutorial on Sunday.

It's kind of all over the place, but I'm learning a bunch of new things
right now:

+ some new hardware (BLE and LoRa)
+ web development / Django
+ mobile development / Android / Java

I'll talk more about each thing in detail, but the idea is that I can
do things like

+ building small nodes that interact with the world (e.g. IoT)
  and gateways to connect them
+ building a web service that can collect information from nodes
+ building mobile and desktop tools for making sense of the information

In general, learning these things opens up my options for problems I can
solve. Right now, I'm mostly limited to building CLI tools and backend
servers. It would be useful to be able to solve my own problems. Later
on, it would also make it easier for me to do my own remote freelance
type of gig.

There are a few concrete ideas I have for things to build:

+ the garden sensor network (e.g. the current adventures in BLE), a
  site for collecting data (even if it runs on a raspberry pi in my
  house), and an app on my phone so I can see what's going on.
+ a morning routine app to help me get started in the morning.
+ a self-hosted evernote replacement that's more tailored to what I want,
  e.g. with better calendar support and that incorporates advanced
  document features (like footnotes and the like).
+ taking my tech library and putting it on a site so that friends can
  check out books (like an actual library).

With that, I guess I'll write up a bit about what I'm trying to accomplish
and the challenges I'll be facing.

Hardware-side
-------------

On the hardware side, I'm using Adafruit Feather
boards (so far, all the work has been using the [nRF52
board](https://www.adafruit.com/product/3406) but I've just received the
[LoRa board](https://www.adafruit.com/product/3178)).

The prototype has just been using the Feather with simulated values,
and I still have plenty of work to do hammering out the beacon protocol
before moving on to hardware. The next step will be hooking the beacon up
to its power system and building an enclosure; this will entail sorting
out a solar charging system and getting an unintrusive enclosure set up.
I'll probably have to design out the supporting PCB; I've been meaning
to figure out how to use Kicad to order boards from OSHPark. I've used
Eagle in the past (even paid for a license) but I'm not a fan of the
direction Autodesk is taking it and it's been a long while since I
designed a board.  It'd be fun to put together a header board with a
JST interface to I<sup>2</sup>C and an MPTT setup.

The collector node is going to be a Rasperry Pi, which means I need to
dig mine up and make sure I can locate it somewhere that can actually
see the nRF52 nodes. Then, I can take the tools that I've built that run
on my laptop and make sure they work on the Pi. I also need to decide
whether the collection API and database live on the Pi or in the cloud.
Running locally means I don't have to worry about the home network going
out, but it also restricts me from accessing it outside of my house. A
bridge to cross later.

Web development
---------------

I've never really spent time in my career building web apps; I've built
a few small REST-like API and RPC systems that are primarily devoted to
supporting command line tools. I've certainly not done much work with
front ends or UI/UX. As part of my move to not having to screw around
with computers as much (e.g. fiddling with the mechanics of the thing v.
using them to solve problems in my life), it'd be nicer to have humane
interfaces --- and the humane answer in many cases is a shiny UI.

So now I find myself learning Django, leveraging my strong Python
background; I've done Restas in Common Lisp, a few Clojure systems,
and Revel in Go, but I feel like it's easier to get answers for things
using Django. I can take the concepts I learn here and translate them
to other systems later.

I've also never really spent time doing database-driven apps. We did
a little SQLite at Echostar, I've built some side projects with light
Postgres, Redis, and CouchDB in the past; but, in general, the things
I've built professionally just haven't needed these things before. I
always have to look up how to create databases, for example, so there's
a lot of stuff here to learn too.

Then there's the UI stuff: another thing I've had next to no experience
in. I've hacked together a little HTML and bootstrap in my time, and
I once wrote a dumb comment system for a company I worked at, but I
really don't know what I'm doing. I'm guessing React is the way to go,
but I'm not sure. Angular was the hotness not too long ago and that was
miserable; maybe it's just putting up with it.

The elephant in the room is that the only web development gig I've had,
I hated. I think that was partly the environment --- never having done
web development, working fully remotely with a bunch of people who also
weren't web developers, at a company that was struggling to make money,
and with the promise of being able to do the work I actually wanted once
we started making money --- and partly just being so in over my head. It
wasn't good, and it was for the mutual benefit of both myself and my
employer that I left. And yet I've grown quite a bit since then, and in
a healthy environment I think I could excel.

Mobile development
------------------

Back when I was doing the Africa deployment with the Army, I got an
iPod touch and a macbook air that I could use to learn how to write
iOS apps. I didn't get too far with it, mostly due to external
circumstances. I did build some things that were useful to me, though;
the only one I remember well was a quiz to help me learn French that I
adapted for Swahili when I moved to Tanzania.

There's a special magic to having tools that you can hold in your hand,
and the touchscreen interface adds a more personal interactivity to it.
I'd like to be able to build tools for myself again that fall in that
category. I'm going with Android because it's easier to get dev hardware
(e.g. I have a Nexus 5X lying around) and I don't need Apple hardware
to run the development environment. I do have a Macbook Air, but it'll
struggle with XCode. I've been looking at a new development laptop,
and it just makes more sense to go the Thinkpad-with-Ubuntu route.

This also means learning Java, which really isn't the problem ---
it's learning the ecosystem and build tooling. Fortunately, IntelliJ
makes it easier, but there's still a lot to learn here too. In fact,
I had to learn Java last year while trying to build a plugin for
[Marathon](https://mesosphere.github.io/marathon/) last year, and it
wasn't too bad. Some people have pointed out that I could learn Kotlin,
but what I found writing Clojure was that not knowing Java really hurt.
When your language is built on the JVM, it helps to the language it was
built for. Learning Java doesn't preclude learning Kotlin later, but
it does make my life easier (I think). Maybe there's a little hesistation
to learn Kotlin given how utterly painful learning Scala was (and I've
written Haskell before).

Other skills
------------

Not having a formal CS background has made learning some of the more
advanced stuff more difficult. It definitely made the AI course that
much more difficult, though it was more the math side that made the
ML course challenging. I've been able to mostly learn what I need from
the math side as I go, but now it's also time to spend time getting
really comfortable with the foundational CS topics: discrete math,
linear algebra, data structures, and algorithms. I'm defining comfortable
as building solid intuitions for things, even if I don't remember the
details. As the old wisdom goes, it's rare that I'll need to implement
a hash map or a binary search tree, but having an intuition for their
properties means being able to make informed decisions in the design
stage of problems.

New hardware
------------

I'm really not keen on buying more hardware, given how much I already
have (the Pixelbook, an X200, an X220, the macbook air, the XPS-13),
but I think I'd like to ditch the XPS-13 and pick up a new Thinkpad over
the next couple months. I just bought the Jetbrains tools to make my life
easier, but the machines I have are struggling with running it. I compared
a new Macbook Pro to the T470, and for several hundred dollars, I could
get a shiny new laptop with half the memory and a weaker processor. It's
admittedly kind of weird being in a spot where I can't just write code on
a netbook (the nice thing about doing embedded development and C/C++/Go
in general), and weird to be using an IDE instead of vimacs.

Afterwards
----------

This round of learning is focused on getting the background and skills
to build interfaces and infrastructure for problem solving. Once I do
that, I think it'll be easier to start solving the problems: throwing
in some data cleaning and statistics (machine learning), CV, NLP, etc.
It's maybe more boring tech, but it's somewhat foundational to the way
the world works right now.
