Title: 2018-07-17
Tags: journal
Date: 2018-07-17 14:55

I mentioned three lines of effort yesterday, but I didn't come up with a plan
for achieving them. So, here's my plan:

## Physical computing

A while ago, I bought the LPC810 kit, but I need to find it. After about a half
hour of rummaging through my parts bins I wasn't able to find it. The nice
thing about it was that it was easy to program, at least with the
[embello](https://github.com/jeelabs/embello) libraries. So with that in mind,
I'll look at his templates for programming the bluepill and maybe approach it the
same way.

Discrete tasks:

0. Look for LPC-810 again.
0. Look at template for STM32: can I do it without a bunch of complications?
0. Failing that, look to see if one of the M0 Feathers can be used similarly.
0. Set up breadboard for appropriate platform.

## Quantum computing

I should be able to get through the first chapter by the end of August. It
seems like a long ways away, but I want to work through more of the exercises
and programming drills, and it will account for starting a new job.

0. Get through Hilbert spaces (i.e. finish two sections) by the end of the
   week.

I'm anxious to get to the part where I can start playing around with the
Rigetti API and the MSQDK, but I need to get through the foundations. Slow but
steady. I should also make some Anki flashcards for this.

The programming drills I still need to do:

+ **Programming drill 2.1.1**: Write three functions that perform addition,
  inverse, and scalar multiplication operations for C<sup>n</sup>, i.e. write
  a function that accepts the appropriate input for each of the operations and
  outputs the vector.
+ **Programming drill 2.2.1**: Convert your functions from the last programming
  drill so that instead of accepting elements of C<sup>n</sup>, they accept 
  elements of C<sup>m×n</sup>.
+ **Programming drill 2.2.2**: Write a function that accepts two complex
  matrices of the appropriate size. The function should do matrix
  multiplication and return the result.
+ **Programming drill 2.2.3**: Write a function that accepts a vector and a 
  matrix and outputs the vector resulting from the action.

I currently have some code in C++, but I might switch to Go just to remember
how to write it again.

## Math for Machine Learning

JFDI: make sure to do the videos and exercises on time.

