Title: 2018-11-13
Tags: haskell, journal
Date: 2018-11-13 18:37

So, I finished my [Haskell web project](https://github.com/kisom/whereami)...

![](/files/images/20181113-whereami.jpg)

I thought it would mostly a Haskell project, but it's turned out to involve a
lot of Javascript, too - which is good in that I now have a project that might
motivate me to learn more about the frontend side of things.

```
~/code/whereami
(0) <hephaestus:kyle> $ cloc app assets static src 
       6 text files.
       6 unique files.                              
       0 files ignored.

github.com/AlDanial/cloc v 1.74  T=0.21 s (28.0 files/s, 1874.2 lines/s)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Language                     files          blank        comment           code
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Haskell                          4             53             11            219
JavaScript                       1             15              5             80
HTML                             1              1              0             18
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUM:                             6             69             16            317
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

There are a lot of further improvements that I could make; it's certainly not a
done project, but it is in a state where I am using it, even if only to submit
location data. It's deployed to my Hetzner colo machine via `docker-compose`.

One of the things that sort of held me back is that I don't have any testing
code. When I'd make changes, I'd ran a local dev server and try to use the app.
Debugging was often painful, because I would just get a log message about that
the server returned a 500. I'd like to investigate more into this. However,
while testing would have been useful, it wouldn't have covered everything. For
example, the Javascript code wasn't always sending the full fields when I
thought it was, which masked some errors. I guess maybe Quickcheck *might* have
helped with this, but I don't think so - the parser operates on JSON strings, and
my constructor requires all the fields to be in place. It would help a lot, though,
so it's something I'd like to learn more about and figure out how to do.

Another thing that testing the Haskell wouldn't have helped with was the hour
or two I spent debugging a
[CORS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) issue. In my
Javascript, I'd hardcoded a URL to 'http://localhost:4000/' - I know hardcoding
URLs is a bad thing, but I didn't yet know about `window.location` and its
components. In any case, I forgot that's what the URL was, and I just kept
getting CORS errors that weren't really useful to debug. Maybe it's that I'm
not a frontend dev, and wasn't terribly familiar with the debug tools, but
either way, this was one of the most challenging things to debug - the Haskell
was actually easier... I spent a bunch of time on a wrong path, thinking it was
an issue with the reverse proxy setup, and I tried all manner of headers and
header tweaking. Turns out it wasn't that :) I eventually figured it out by
noticing that the server logs weren't showing any POSTs.

Another interesting thing that I found out is that the SQLite library that I'm
[using](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/sqlite-simple-0.4.9.0/) parses the
`TIMESTAMP` type as a string, which made getting it with my `Coordinate` type
(where the `timestamp` field is an `Int`) impossible. That required a schema
change from `timestamp TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` to `INTEGER NOT
NULL`. This also encodes the decision to require a timestamp for the
coordinate; to do so, I wrote a quick filter function that would add the
current timestamp to coordiantes if the timestamp was 0.

This, actually, turned out to be probably the most difficult Haskell bug to
track down. What I hadn't realised about Haskell is that it won't warn on
inexhaustive case matches, and it compiled fast enough on my machine that I
missed the warning message in the Stack output. I fixed this by adding

```
  ghc-options:
  - -fwarn-incomplete-patterns
  - -fwarn-incomplete-uni-patterns
  - -Werror
```

to `package.yaml`, but Scotty was covering the actual error and converting it
into a 500. This was another source of trouble: rather than have the app
explode with an error message (or even printing a useful error message), all I
saw were error 500s. I had to `putStrLn` debug it... there's probably a way to
get these error messages out, but I couldn't figure it out. Eventually, I ran
an upgrade on the colo machine, which is pretty slow - slow enough that I saw the
GHC warning and was able to pinpoint the problem. Still, it took longer than I'd
like and admittedly, unit testing would have caught this.

Deploying was a bit of a pain until I switched Docker to running stack build on
the bindmounted read-write directory. I'm sure there's all kinds of issues with
this, but I'm relying on basic auth and TLS to protect things for now.
Eventually, I'll want to build an Argon2-based session system using a username
and password and maybe even U2F or a TOTP. I need to figure out what that's
going to look like for this.

I also was able to excise all of the calls to `unsafePerformIO` by doing things
at the top-level: reading environment variables for configs, opening a
connection to the database, etc. It was a shift in how I was thinking about
things and a far cry from the part where I used a globally-defined `IORef` or
STM `TVar`. I do think I understand better how I would use those (e.g.
instantiating in `main` and passing them off to functions).

On a web-dev note, I made the mistake of confusing the Content-Type and Accept
headers: Content-Type is what the server returns, and Accept is what the client
requests. I was using Content-Type for both purposes for a while and wondering
why it wasn't working. I think I figured it out by looking at the headers of a
request.

Finally, on a meta note, I spent a lot of time programming this on my docker
T480. I've got an old Acer 24" 1080p monitor, a full-size WASD CODE keyboard
(with MX Cherry Clear switches), a wireless Logitech trackball, and a pair of
Sennheiser HD650s plugged into a Lenovo Ultra docking station, and this setup
has proven to be quite productive. It's rather easy to just lift my laptop off
the docking station to take it elsewhere (e.g. the living room) when I need to
move around, and I love having a mechanical keyboard. I might upgrade to 4K
monitor later, but I'm getting along just fine with the smaller one. Both my
laptop and the monitor have the same resolution (1920x1080) so there's no weird
resizing of things during the handoff.

It's nice to be writing software for myself again.