Title: 2018-02-21: Revisiting Forth
Tags: journal, forth, kforth
Date: 2018-02-21 14:38

At work lately I've been feeling like I'm losing my skills as a
programmer. I need something to work on, something that captures my
interest. One project I enjoyed working on in the past was kforth, but
I never got far with it. I picked up some tiny, cheap STM32 M0 boards
and now I'm trying to implement a Forth on there.

One thing I liked at Echostar was that we had a lot of components that
you could build with a flag like `S=PC` to build for your workstation
or `S=STB` to build for a set top box. With that in mind, I'm trying
to make this Forth modular so that it's easy to test on my laptop and
then deploy to the board --- the biggest difference will be setting
system limits (my Linux laptop can probably deal with a larger stack
than a Cortex M0, for example) and the I/O subsystem --- on my laptop,
I don't want to have to interact with a serial console, but that's how
I'm going to have to do it on the microcontrollers.

Anyways, I've been thinking about the problem of how to build the
backbone. My first thought was something like

```
struct entry {
        char    word[MAX_WORD_LEN];
        void    (*fun)(void);
        struct entry *next;
};
```

to represent an entry. The `fun` field is the function that's being
pointed to; I made it take no arguments as it should be taking them
from the stack; I suspect `void` is the wrong return type,
though.

From here, how do we build up a lexicon? My (what I suspect to be
naïve) approach is to build out a fixed size list of entries with some
room to grow (e.g. in the case of `:`, the word definer).

The question arises: where does the stack come from? That is, the
`fun` field is supposed to operate on a stack, but where is this
stack? I started filling out a `system.h` file with a set of globals,
which I suspect is an acceptable approach. So what are the globals
we'll want?

* a stack
* a binding hash table of some sort, so we can store variables

I got this far, then my immediate thought was that the binding table
shouldn't just be for variables: what if it was for functions, too?

Okay, so we create a linked list of bindings, and store the *tail* of
this list; each entry should point to the *previous* entry. Why? Because
then you can do things like this:

```
: adjustment 4 ;           -- bind 'adjustment' to the value 4
: magic-box adjustment * ; -- bind 'magic-box' to multiply by adjustment
: adjustment 2 ;           -- later we want to tune down our adjustment
```

This is supposed to be one of the features of Forth, so this approach
lets us keep it. But before I can do that, how to represent a word? A
word, after all, can be either a value (a number or a string) or a
function. This is where I'm stopped at (the day job requires
attention), but then the dictionary is straightforward:

```
struct vocabulary {
        struct entry *last;
        size_t        length;
};
```

The length here is mostly to help with memory management, to catch
possible memory overflows before they happen.

I think this makes sense. I need to figure out what a word looks like,
though. I do have ideas for functions, though:

```
constexpr uint8_t NFUN = 1; // native fun
constexpr uint8_t LFUN = 2; // lambda fun
// native_fun points to a native function.
struct native_fun {
        uint8_t type;
        (void *)(fun)(void);
};

// fun points to either another lambda_fun (e.g. an intepreted
// function) or to a native_fun; next points to the next function (or
// NULL if there's no next function).
struct lambda_fun {
        uint8_t type;
        void *fun;
		void *next;
};
```

It feels good to actually think about problems again. I've so missed
this kind of work.
