Title: 2018-05-09
Tags: journal
Date: 2018-05-09 19:37

I had a hard time getting anything done today owing to a lack of sleep, but
I did get two things done: more work on the Django tutorial, and figure out
how to template out my current mechanical (e.g. translating a YAML config
for one system to another) task at work. The work thing is a least a little
code, but still writing config files so there's that.

As for Django, the MDN project is for a local library (the kind with
books and librarians), which is basically what I wanted my first actual
project to be. I have a massive collection of tech books in eBook form:

```
$ find . -name \*.pdf | wc -l
943
$ du -hs
11G	.
```

and I like to be able to loan them out to friends; I can trust they'll
delete the local copies when they check them back in. It'll also be
nice to have a remotely-accessible copy of the library that isn't just
in Dropbox. I found that my mental model of representation lined up
well the tutorial's, which is encouraging.

I forgot to switch the nRF52 over to battery last night, so I had to
start it this morning (around maybe 6 AM) and it's still going. The
500 mAh battery was probably well over what I actually needed, but
I wasn't sure how much battery the radio would draw. It'll be interesting
to see how much lifetime I can actually get, and then to hook it up to
the LoRa board and see how much lifetime I can get on that.

I was talking to someone the other day and it reminded me of
something from the first chapter in [An Introduction to Natural
Computation](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/introduction-natural-computation),
in which the author compares programming to the brain:

+ neural networks as memory
+ reinforcement learning as the program (e.g. the actual action-taking
  and reflection part of the brain)
+ evolution algorithms as architecture

Even after the AI and ML courses, I hadn't really thought of it this
way before, but it makes sense in a certain light.

Okay, sleep deprived rambling over.
