Title: 2019-03-31
Date: 2019-03-31 18:24
Tags: journal

Lots going on (such as [blackbook](https://blackbook.systems/)) but I'm
only going to focus on one thing today.

I've been giving Rust another go, and one of the projects that I started
working on is an `inotify(7)`-based file watcher. Basically, I wanted to
be able to run this program (`watchers`) in the root directory of a
project, something along the lines of

```
$ watchers -p '\.rs$' -c makers .
```

What does this do? It watches `.` for any changed files, and if they match
the pattern (`-p`) `\.rs$`, it should execute the command (`-c`) `makers`.

I'd hoped that I could edit my source code under `src` or what have you
and it would rebuild. I don't want it to run for everything, though -
sometimes a file like `.gitignore` is changed, and you don't want it to
pick up on swap files and whatnot.

Anyways, I started working on this, and settled on a hash map that was
a mapping of the inotify watch descriptors to a structure that contains
the pattern and command. To make a long story short, the inotify events
contain the relevant path, but for events under a subdirectory, you
only get the directory as the path, which means you can't filter on a
file pattern.

I'd written this same program a few years back in Go, and it makes for
a good systems programming problem. I'd forgotten this part of inotify,
but you have two options:

1. Watch each directory, add new directories as they are created, and
   remove the ones that are deleted.
2. List each subdirectory and build a list of files that match the
   pattern that should be watched. Watch the directories they're in for
   new files being created, and watch those that match the pattern.

Funny how these things are never as straightforward as you want...
