Title: Hack Week is over
Date: 2019-04-14 15:39
Tags: hackweek

Well, hack week is over. I only got in writeups Monday and Tuesday;
it's useful to consider what my goals were, what happened, what worked
and didn't work, and what I ended up with.

Revisiting the [intro post](/posts/2019/04/08/hack-week-day-1/), I had
two projects:

1. [GraphBook](https://github.com/kisom/graphbook)
2. [LoRa modems](https://github.com/kisom/lora-modem)

I tried to do as much as I could with the pi-top, which was more than I
thought but not as much as I wanted.

How did these two projects pan out?

Well, GraphBook has a sort-of TUI. It's sort of in that it displays a
list of nodes, lets you select the node, and shows the node and any
nodes it's linked to. I have a small HTTP API that doesn't support
writing or updating nodes; it quickly became apparent that a web
interface was not something I'd want to use at all. A GUI *could* be
useful, but what I really want is that TUI. So I have something of a
start, but I need to spend more time learning [Urwid](http://urwid.org/)
to get familiar with it. I'm running into a bug now that I'm sure is
just me not understanding the lifecycle of the system. Not understanding
how the system works caused a lot of friction in the debug cycles, but
it wasn't too bad getting to where I am.

The other project was the LoRa modem. I had originally hoped to use an
Adafruit Feather M4 with an RFM95 Featherwing to get the EEPROM support
from the M4, but my hardware wasn't cooperating and I had to use the
EEPROM-less M0 that I had.  I ran into a lot of hardware issues,
including not being able to get any of the boards to show up with the
pi-top and the M4 only working with CircuitPython.  I ended up using
CircuitPython to quickly write beacon transmission and reception
functions that mimicked a sender and receiver, respectively, enough
to facilitate testing.

I didn't get a UI for the modem, though. I started looking at Tkinter,
but didn't get it quite into a place where the UI is anything I'd share
or recommend anyone use. Again, it came down to a lack of understanding
of how things are done in this world and a limited amount of time. This
meant that during the demo, Terin had to use the direct serial interface
to send and receive messages, which isn't a bad thing, but I'd rather
make something a little more user friendly. Either way, we were able to
send messages between Brannan and Townsend street, even though my node
had a paperclip for antenna... I had dropped off the node with the wire
antenna to Terin, figuring I could scavenge a replacement antenna.

A persistent problem that I had during this week was a lack of sleep due
to some life events, which certainly made it remarkably difficult to
learn new things. I remarked on this with my girlfriend with the
comment, "makes me wonder how university ever worked." I've been working
to ensure that I get *at least* six hours of sleep, but that's not
enough to be higher-level functioning (and stimulants don't help, they
just keep me from falling below a certain baseline). The other challenge
was the pi-top; it's not a great machine for doing hardware work (which
is disappointing because the lora-modem project was intended for use
with the pi-top. That being said, I'm not sure if it was just the Cortex
M4 that was having troubles and I never ended up trying with the M0 node,
so maybe that works.

So I've got a working LoRa node that has a few issues that need
addressing to make it more useful, but it's pretty useful as it is
now. And it works, though like any other radio it'd benefit from a
better antenna.

GraphBook's core data model seems to work, but the presentation is
severely lacking. I've decided that I'm going to make it my business to
hack on it and the lora-modem exclusively over the next few months to
focus on actually getting it done. The first thing I need to do is sit
down and read the Urwid overview, but that's scheduled and in my Bullet
Journal already.

I think in September, I'm going to find another team to be a part of. It
was fun to build the things I wanted, but I think I'd like to branch out
more next time.
